Add release notes for 0.284 (#21027)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-0.284.rst

=============
Release 0.284
=============

**Highlights**

> ==============

Reviewer: If there are no highlights please remove this section

Reviewer: This still seems to be around in the latest changes :) Please remove it .

Reviewer 2: Oops, removed

**Details**
===========

General Changes
_______________
* Fix correctness bug in the optimizer when ``randomize_outer_join_null_key`` is enabled.
* Fix bug in array ``CONTAINS`` expression rewrite rule.
* Fix bugs parsing lambda expressions.  The bugs may cause compile exception with message "Can not compile special form: WHEN" and lead to runtime exception of array out of bound access.

> * Improve cache efficiency of history-based optimizer.

Reviewer: this doesn't seem like a user facing change. If it is important can we add more details on what was the % improvement.

Reviewer: sounds good. Let's keep it if there is some end benefit to the user.

* Add field names when casting row to JSON.
* Add :func:`array_top_n` to return an array of top ``N`` elements of a given array.
* Add session property ``restrict_history_based_optimization_to_complex_query``. When set to ``TRUE``, only queries with join or aggregation will try to use HBO. The default value is ``TRUE``.
* Add :func:`bitwise_xor_agg` function.
* Add session property ``pull_expression_from_lambda_enabled`` to optimize lambda functions which have expressions not referring to arguments of the lambda function.  The default state is enabled using the value ``TRUE``.
* Add ``rewrite_constant_array_contains_to_in_expression`` session property to improve the performance of ``CONTAINS`` expressions.  The default state is enabled using the value ``TRUE``.
* Improve performance of outer join when nulls are present. It can be enabled by setting ``randomize_outer_join_null_key_strategy`` to be ``cost_based``. The trigger condition can be set by session properties ``randomize_outer_join_null_key_null_count_threshold`` and ``randomize_outer_join_null_key_null_ratio_threshold``.

> * Add function :func:`trail`.

Reviewer: A small nit. Can we club together all the new functions and then the properties. Makes it easier to read.

* Add session property ``optimizers_to_enable_verbose_runtime_stats`` to enable runtime tracking for a set of optimizers.
* Add support for ``EXPLAIN (TYPE VALIDATE)`` of ``EXPLAIN`` queries. Previously such queries would fail with an error.

> * Improve performance of cluster statistics reporting in the Presto coordinator by adding the configuration property ``cluster-stats-cache-expiration-duration``. The property is ``0`` (disabled) by default.

Reviewer: Improvements should be after Fixes and before Additions as per https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes

* Add support for serializing nested data structures via server-side configuration properties using the configuration property ``nested-data-serialization-enabled``. The property is enabled by default with the value ``TRUE``.

> * Add a Redis-based historical statistics provider.  (See :doc:`Redis HBO Provider Documentation </plugin/redis-hbo-provider>`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Add a Redis-based historical statistics provider.  For more information, see :doc:`Redis HBO Provider </plugin/redis-hbo-provider>`.
```
Nit edit to remove unneeded parentheses, and to remove "Documentation" from the link text as it's not part of the destination title. Considered and rejected moving "documentation" to after the link - left it out entirely as I didn't feel the word added value for the reader.

Reviewer 2: Done

* Add principal name support in the resource group selection criteria.
* Add :func:`NOISY_COUNT_GAUSSIAN`.
* Add :func:`NOISY_SUM_GAUSSIAN`.

> * Add :func:`noisy_avg_gaussian`.

Reviewer 2: Done

> * Improve cost-based optimizer to work with complex equi-join predicates.

Reviewer: same as above

* Fix :func:`min` and :func:`max` to verify second argument is unique.

> * Improve scheduling performance.

Reviewer: same as above. This is also bit skimpy on details.

Reviewer 2: There was a much more verbose message before that was very difficult to translate into something relevant to a customers' deployment.  Here again, I feel the option is to keep it as it is or remove, would like your thoughts.

Reviewer: We can remove this since this is too generic without any concrete details.

Reviewer 2: Removed

> * Fix access control checks for ``IS NULL`` and ``IS NOT NULL``.

Reviewer: move Fixes to the top.

* Add ``noisy_count_if_gaussian(condition, noiseScale[, randomSeed])`` aggregation which calculates the number of ``TRUE`` input values, and then adds random Gaussian noise with 0 mean and standard deviation of ``noise_scale`` to the true count. Optional ``randomSeed`` is used to get a fixed value of noise, often for reproducibility purposes. If ``randomSeed`` is omitted, ``SecureRandom`` is used. If ``randomSeed`` is provided, ``Random`` is used.

Iceberg Connector Changes

> _________________________

Reviewer: empty section and can be removed.

PostgreSQL Connector Changes
____________________________
* Upgrade JDBC driver version to 42.6.0.

Hive Changes
____________
* Add DWRF filetype to min, max filtering for special column types such as tinyint, varbinary and timestamp.

> * Fix directory listing over directories with content-type ``application/octet-stream`` (:issue:`20310`).

Reviewer: Fix then Add

Iceberg Changes
_______________
* Add Iceberg table location property in ``SHOW CREATE TABLE``.

> * Add validation for copy-on-write mode for Iceberg tables. This can be disabled with the ``merge_on_read_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.enable-merge-on-read-mode``configuration property.

Reviewer 2: Done

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________

Postgresql Connector Changes
____________________________
* Upgrade JDBC driver version to 42.6.0.

Hive Changes
____________
* Add DWRF filetype to min, max filtering for special column types such as tinyint, varbinary and timestamp.
* Fix directory listing over directories with content-type ``application/octet-stream`` (:issue:`20310`).

Iceberg Changes
_______________
* Add Iceberg table location property in ``SHOW CREATE TABLE``.
* Add validation for copy-on-write mode for Iceberg tables. This can disabled with the ``merge_on_read_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.enable-merge-on-read-mode``configuration property.
* Add support for ``TRUNCATE TABLE <table>``.
* Remove support for specifying `NOT NULL` constraint when adding a new column in `ALTER TABLE` statement.
* Update Iceberg from 1.3.0 to 1.3.1.

Presto-verifier Changes
_______________________

> * Add support for Verifier to run in query-bank mode and save query results as a snapshot. (See :doc:`Verifier Documentation /develop/admin/verifier.rst`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Add support for Presto Verifier to run in query-bank mode and save query results as a snapshot. (See :doc:`Presto Verifier </admin/verifier>`.)

Links can be tricky! A local build showed this link as incorrectly formatted. I verified the revised link in suggestion with a local build. 
```

=============
Release 0.284
=============

**Highlights**
==============

**Details**
===========

General Changes
_______________

> * Fix a bug in `RandomizeNullKeyInOuterJoin` optimizer. It produced incorrect results when the join key are of type varchar, and has value like 'r0', 'r11' etc in left side and NULL in the right side or value like 'l1', 'l12' on the right side and NULL in the left side.

Reviewer 3: Are the example values ('r0', 'r11', and 'l1', 'l12') formatted appropriately?

* Fix bug in array contains to In expression rewrite rule. It will throw exception for expression `contains(null, col)`, now it will be skipped and not throwing exceptions.
* Fix bugs in PullUpExpressionInLambdaRules. The bugs may cause compile exception with message "Can not compile special form: WHEN" and lead to runtime exception of array out of bound access.
* Fix the cache usage in HBO optimization. This will reduce the number of access to meta data for input table statistics.
* Improved row to json cast by including field names in the resulting json by making it a map instead of an array.
* Add :func:`array_top_n` to return an array of top N elements of a given array.
* Add a session property ``restrict_history_based_optimization_to_complex_query``. When set to true, only queries with join or aggregation will try to use HBO. The default value is true.

> * Add aggregate function: bitwise_xor_agg.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Add aggregate function: ``bitwise_xor_agg``.
```

* MinN/maxN's second argument is now checked to be unique.
* Node config property `node.ip` is now a legacy config. It is replaced with `node.internal-address` to support hostname/FQDN too.
* Optimize  `SqlStageExecution.checkAllTaskFinal` call.
* Reduce dns lookup overhead on NodeScheduler. This can avoid unnecessary dns lookup for HostAddress has port, while previous would incurred additional overhead when dns too slow on some host environment.
* Reduce number of call to  `SqlStageExecution.checkAllTaskFinal`.
* Skip access control checks for IS NULL and IS NOT NULL.
* The Iceberg connector now supports `TRUNCATE TABLE <table>` statements.
* This commit adds `noisy_count_if_gaussian(condition, noiseScale[, randomSeed])` aggregation which calculates the number of `TRUE` input values, and then adds random Gaussian noise with 0 mean and standard deviation of ``noise_scale`` to the true count. Optional randomSeed is used to get a fixed value of noise, often for reproducibility purposes. If randomSeed is omitted, SecureRandom is used. If randomSeed is provided, Random is used.

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________

> * Enforce copy-on-write mode for Iceberg tables. This can disabled with the ``merge_on_read_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.enable-merge-on-read-mode``configuration property.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Enforce copy-on-write mode for Iceberg tables. This can be disabled with the ``merge_on_read_enabled`` session property or the ``iceberg.enable-merge-on-read-mode`` configuration property.
```
